[Consensus] State Sync - Block by Block Design (issue-#125) (#342)
pokt-network/pocket: consensus/doc/PROTOCOL_STATE_SYNC.md

  ...
}
```
This data is collected through the P2P protocol during the `Churn Management Protocol`, but for the sake of demonstration and simplicity, it may be abstracted to an `ask-response` cycle where the node continuously asks this meta-information of its active peers.
```mermaid
sequenceDiagram

actor  Node

participant  Network  Peer(s)

autonumber

loop  Churn  Management

Node->>Network  Peer(s): Are you alive? If so What is your Peer Metadata?

Network  Peer(s)->>Node: Here's my Peer Metadata, what's yours?

Node->>Network  Peer(s): ACK, I'll ask again in a bit to make sure I'm up to date

end
```

The aggregation and consumption of this peer-meta information enables the State Sync protocol by enabling the node to understand the globalized network state by sampling Peer Metadata through its local peer list.

```golang
type PeerSyncAggregate struct {
  Peers []PeerSyncMeta // The current list of peers and the known metadata
  MaxPeerHeight int64  // The maximum height associated with all known peers
  ...
}
```
Using the `PeerSyncAggregate`, a Node is able to understand its local `SyncState` against that of the Global Network.

> ### Pacemaker Mode

Author: This is a really interesting point... 

If the pacemaker only works for Validators then it's inevitable that the State Sync protocol will have to distinguish between `Full Nodes` and `Validators`. Unless we **remove pacemaker mode** in favor of **SyncedMode**.

I'd much prefer the `State Sync` protocol be agnostic to the node type...

I think we should replace `Pacemaker Mode` with `Synced Mode` and limit the Pacemaker to just play with consensus but allow it to pass a block to the `State Sync` protocol with something like a 'self peer - block response message'...

WYT?

> ### Pacemaker Mode

Author: Bump @Olshansk

> ### Pacemaker Mode

Author: State sync has little to do with `Proposals` 

It is an engine to process `committed blocks` - but yes. Your understanding is correct

In `SyncMode`, the Node is catching up to the latest block by making `BlockRequests` to its fellow eligible peers. A peer is eligible for a `BlockRequest` if `PeerMeta.MinHeight` <= `BlockHeight` <= `PeerMeta.MaxHeight`.

Though it is `unspecified` whether or not a Node may make the `BlockRequests` in order or parallelize, due to the cryptographic restraints of block processing, the Node must process the blocks sequentially by `ApplyingBlock` 1 by 1 until it is `Synced`.

It is important to note, if any blocks processed result in an invalid `AppHash` during `ApplyBlock`, a new `BlockRequest` must be issued until a valid block is found.

### Server Mode

In the `StateSync` protocol, the Node fields valid `BlockRequests` from its peers to help them `CatchUp` to be `Synced`. This sub-protocol is continuous throughout the lifecycle of StateSync.

```mermaid
graph TD
    A[StateSync] -->|IsCaughtUp| B(Pacemaker Mode)
    B --> |Consensus Messages| C(ConsensusModule.Pacemaker)
    A -->|IsSyncing| E(Sync Mode)
    E -->|Request Block| G[Peers]
    G--> |ApplyBlock| A
    A --> D[Server Mode]
    D --> |Serve Blocks Upon Request| G
```

> ## Follow up tasks

Reviewer: Optional for all the bullet points below: Consider using `*` to make these lists.

> ## Follow up tasks

Reviewer: Consider Adding

`Block Chunk Design` - Update the `Block by Block` design to be able to receive and provide multiple blocks at a time.

Source for idea: `Snapshot chunks` from evmos: https://docs.evmos.org/validators/setup/statesync.html#check-logs

`Block Stream Design` - Update the `Block by Block` design to stream blocks via a WebSocket from a single connectable peer.

Source for idea: `Stremable` approach from Chia Network https://docs.chia.net/networking-protocol

> `Fast Sync Design` - Sync only the last `N` blocks from `Latest Network Height`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Checkpoint Sync Design` - Sync only the last `N` blocks from a previously saved state or a trusted source
```

> `Parallel Sync Design` - Optimize the State Sync protocol by parallelizing requests and computation

Reviewer: I think the canonical name for this might be `Optimistic Sync`: https://geth.ethereum.org/docs/interface/sync-modes.

```
Optimistic sync downloads blocks before the execution client has validated them. In optimistic sync the node assumes the data it receives from its peers is correct during the downloading phase but then retroactively verifies each downloaded block. Nodes are not allowed to attest or propose blocks while they are still ‘optimistic’ because they can’t yet guarantee their view of the head of the chain is correct.
```

> ## Research Items

Reviewer: Thoughts on moving these into an GH issue (or GH discussion) titled `[Core] Evaluate & Prioritize State Sync Improvements`. That way we can add more (through edits or comments) ideas as they come up and have a discussion around them.

It can be an M5 ticket.

Author: For research items or for follow up tasks. In anycase are you suggesting that the PROTOCOL.md file is not the best place for these - as I'm not a fan of duplicating TODO's

If the Node is `Syncing` or `localSyncState.Height < GlobalSyncMeta.Height` then the `StateSync` protocol is in `SyncMode`.

In `SyncMode`, the Node is catching up to the latest block by making `BlockRequests` to its fellow eligible peers. A peer is eligible for a `BlockRequest` if `PeerMeta.MinHeight` <= `self.MaxBlockHeight` <= `PeerMeta.MaxHeight`.

Though it is `unspecified` whether or not a Node may make the `BlockRequests` in order or parallelize, due to the cryptographic restraints of block processing, the Node must process the blocks sequentially by `ApplyingBlock` 1 by 1 until it is `Synced`.

It is important to note, if any blocks processed result in an invalid `AppHash` during `ApplyBlock`, a new `BlockRequest` must be issued until a valid block is found.

### Server Mode

In the `StateSync` protocol, the Node fields valid `BlockRequests` from its peers to help them `CatchUp` to be `Synced`. This sub-protocol is continuous throughout the lifecycle of StateSync.

```mermaid
graph TD
    A[StateSync] -->|IsCaughtUp| B(Pacemaker Mode)
    B --> |Consensus Messages| C(ConsensusModule.Pacemaker)
    A -->|IsSyncing| E(Sync Mode)
    E -->|Request Block| G[Peers]

>     G--> |ApplyBlock| A

Author: It's showing the `requestLoop`

**Request Block** -> Peers -> **ApplyBlock** -> REPEAT StateSync

>     G--> |ApplyBlock| A

Reviewer: Got it!

  ...
}
```
Using the `PeerSyncAggregate`, a Node is able to compare its local `SyncState` against that of the Global Network.

## State Sync Operation Modes

State sync can be viewed as a state machine that transverses various modes the node can be in, including:
* Synced Mode
* Sync Mode
* Server Mode

The functionality of the node depends on the mode it is operating it. 

*NOTE: that the modes are not necessarily mutually exclusive (e.g. the node can be in `Server Mode` and `Synced Mode` at the same time).*

### Synced Mode
If the Node is `Synced` or `localSyncState.Height == GlobalSyncMeta.Height` then the `StateSync` protocol is in `SyncedMode`.

In `SyncedMode`, the Node is caught up to the latest block and relies on new blocks to be propagated via the P2P network after Validators reach consensus.

### Sync Mode
If the Node is `Syncing` or `localSyncState.Height < GlobalSyncMeta.Height` then the `StateSync` protocol is in `SyncMode`.

In `SyncMode`, the Node is catching up to the latest block by making `BlockRequests` to its fellow eligible peers. A peer is eligible for a `BlockRequest` if `PeerMeta.MinHeight` <= `self.MaxBlockHeight` <= `PeerMeta.MaxHeight`.

> Though it is `unspecified` whether or not a Node may make `BlockRequests` in order or in parallel, the cryptographic restraints of block processing require the Node to call `ApplyingBlock` sequentially until it is `Synced`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Though it is `unspecified` whether or not a Node may make `BlockRequests` in order or in parallel, the cryptographic restraints of block processing require the Node to call `ApplyBlock` sequentially until it is `Synced`.
```

```mermaid
graph TD
    A[StateSync] -->|IsCaughtUp| B(Synced Mode)
    B --> |Consensus Messages| C(ConsensusModule.Synced)
    A --> |IsSyncing| E(Sync Mode)
    E --> |Request Block| G[Peers]
    G--> |ApplyBlock| A
    A --> D[Server Mode]
    D --> |Serve Blocks Upon Request| G
```

## Follow up tasks

* `Fast Sync Design` - Sync only the last `N` blocks from `Latest Network Height`

* `Optimistic Sync Design` - Optimize the State Sync protocol by parallelling requests and computation

* `Block Chunk Design` - Update the Block by Block design to be able to receive and provide multiple blocks at a time.

* `Block Stream Design` - Update the Block by Block design to stream blocks via a WebSocket from a single connectable peer.

## Research Items
TODO(M5): Create issues to track and discuss these work items.

How the persistence layer design of `pruning` the Merkle Tree affects `StateSync`.

How DB Pruning of the `SQL DB` might affect fast sync.

How the Churn Management operations of RainTree might provide opportunities and obstacles with StateSync.

> ## Glossary

Reviewer: Question: do we need to differentiate between protocol-level actors and simply full nodes?

In the context of RainTree, I know we've discussed that list, being the same across all actors, is a function of the world state. For state sync, I believe full nodes are fair game as well.

I think adding a comment about this could be a helpful distinction.

Author: I think we do not at this level - but not strong on this. If you think it's helpful - add a comment before the merge

`ApplyingBlock`: The process of playing block parts and its subsequent transactions against the Node's world state using the Utility Module and Validating the `AppHash` contained in the block against the produced `AppHash` from the local state.

`BlockRequests`: A message from an active peer, requesting a block to sync the chain to the Global Network State.

`Churn Management Protocol`: The protocol in Pocket's P2P Module that ensures the most updated and valid Network Peer list possible.

> `Network Peer`: A node that is directly connected and sharing resources without going through a third party server. Peers may start the connection through an `inbound` or `outbound` initialization.

Reviewer: I feel like `resources` can be interpreted as compute resources so I rewarded it a bit.

```suggestion
`Network Peer`: Another node on the network that this node can directly communicate with, without going through a third-party server. Peers may start the connection through an `inbound` or `outbound` initialization to share and transmit data.
```
